[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think Made on Gabriola
to me means made by hand,
made well, made--
fueled by creativity,
not fueled by money or--
I mean, it is.
Everything is.
But it's not the main thing.
Like, the people here
doing art are here
because they love doing art.
>> I'm imagining people
who love their homes.
People in location, in
place, and connected
to place in interesting ways.
>> We've branded ourselves
the Isle of the Arts.
And it's not just about having
a high concentration of artists.
You know, it's about
having a place where,
because of the open attitudes
and the casualness of it,
it sort of fosters creativity.
>> And it draws in a lot of
artists and a lot of, again,
people who want to
feel the freedom,
if you can call it that.
You're still trapped
by normal trappings,
but you just seem to have
more control over it.
You seem to have more time.
>> Rather than making it--
trying to make 100
of the same item
be exactly the same, which is
the efficient way to do it,
I make each instrument have
its own voice and be unique.
>> You know, there's so many
craftsmen on this island.
You know, I was saying to
my daughter the other day,
I said, the one thing I think
I've learned from living here
is how much integrity it takes
to do the simplest things.
>> So Gabriola is a very
rich community of makers,
of artists and
artisans, and partly
because of the environment.
This space inspires art.
It inspires creativity.
And the natural
beauty of the island
creates a space for people to
be creative and to make things.
There's also a very
supportive community.
Artists and makers
support each other,
help each other, trade
products with each other.
And so there's a very strong
support network that way.
And then the community at large
values the work that they do.
Whether they want
to learn from them,
they want to own and
appreciate and use the items
that they make, it's supported
on all levels in the community.
[SCRAPING]
>> I used to spend my commute
to my desk job drawing
and sketching jewelry and
reading jewelry books.
And you know, I'd get
home and call my mom
and ask her how to do things.
And it just evolved from there.
So it started as a hobby
about, say, 11 years ago.
It had always been in my
life, but never an option
as a career, and I
really don't know why.
>> I have been on
Gabriola for 10 years now.
I arrived here from Montreal to
attend the Silva Bay Shipyard
School.
I knew very little about
the island, actually.
I feel like I was very
fortunate in having ended up
in a place that was
just perfect for me,
and it worked out in ways that
I wouldn't have anticipated.
And a lot of that has to do
with the culture of people
making and crafting here.
Which, it seems strange now
to have been entirely unaware
of it, but I kind of walked into
the ideal situation for myself.
In a lot of ways, the
infrastructure's set up here--
infrastructure,
you know, casually
speaking-- for people to pursue
their craft independently,
which you don't really see
in a lot of other places.
Or you do, but it's
less accessible.
And something about
the combination
of being a small community
that's somewhat isolated,
but we have access
to larger places--
Vancouver, Victoria, we
have the tourist population
that comes in in the summer--
it makes it all very doable.
>> Everything's just
slower here, and yeah.
We have the time and solitude
to kind of make our businesses
exactly what we want them to be.
It's a place where it's easier
to just focus on a few things,
but just to go deeper
in those things.
It's easier to
filter out influences
that you might be
more susceptible to
if you were in a larger area.
>> One thing that I do like
about being on this island is
that I don't have
those influences.
I'm not competing with,
like, Pandora or all the Made
in China stuff.
And my rent would be
higher for my studio.
My audience might be
higher end, you know?
Like, I can't think of anywhere
on this island where you
could buy a ring for over $500.
[SNAP]
>> So the advantage for
me of being here is, well,
the isolation, you know?
And you can do it selectively.
If you're not isolated to a
point where you're going stir
crazy, you can pick and choose.
>> I think it would feel
like a job in a city.
Like, you get up, you take
the bus, you go to your thing,
you go out and get
your Starbucks coffee,
and you go to your shop.
Whereas here, it's
like, I don't know.
Yeah, you're right.
It feels more like part
of a lifestyle here.
[SCRATCHING]
I just moved to BC, and I got
my first job at a design firm
in [INAUDIBLE].
And I thought, what
could I do from home?
What can I-- and like a light
bulb, I just thought, jewelry.
Of course.
Like, my mom's been a
silversmith my entire life,
for more than 40
years of her life.
And she knows everything, and
I've learned so much from her,
just watching her in her
studios when I was a kid.
She used to take
me to her studios
when I was two
years old, and I've
learned how to be a jeweler.
And anyway, so I literally just
called her out of the blue,
and I was like, Mom, can I
come and just learn from you?
And she said, sure.
I'm a purist in what I do.
I like making
everything from scratch.
I do all my own designs.
I use traditional methods of
silversmithing and traditional
tools.
And the process of
traditional silversmithing
has really not changed
in hundreds of years.
We're still using the same kinds
of tools and same techniques
as they did in the old days.
And actually, traditionally, the
silversmithing was a man's job.
Women doing that, it's
kind of a new thing.
There's a lot of blood
and blisters involved.
[LAUGHTER]
We go through a
lot of Band-Aids.
Definitely have a
lot of injuries.
[LAUGH]
But it comes with the job.
I'll never have a nice nails.
There's a lot of
sensory, tactile parts
to silversmithing.
And I know, like,
the amount of tension
that I have to put on something
to bend it to a certain form
or to pinch something
together or to hammer.
I like the big,
heavy-duty torch.
The big guns.
There's a lot of sounds in
soldering like the torch going
on like that and the sound--
[POP]
--of the torch starting.
When I started making
jewelry, those sounds--
totally, it brought
back memories
of my childhood and listening
to my mom do her silversmithing.
The pop of the torch and
the hiss of the flame,
they're etched in my memory.
[HAMMERING]
And this-- I'll show
you the next cool sound.
[LAUGH]
The acid.
[SWISH]
Well, actually, that was
pretty anticlimactic.
But when you put a big piece
that's really hot, it goes--
[HISS]
So this is the sound
that I like right here.
[HISS]
[LAUGH]
That sound brings back memories.
It's like the smell of drywall,
it reminds me of my dad.
[LAUGH]
And the sound of like--
it's called quenching, the sound
of quenching reminds me of him.
I like this part.
I feel proud to be a
woman who can use tools.
I just-- I feel
pretty honored to have
been given this knowledge
from my mother, of all people.
My daughter once said to
me, I said [INAUDIBLE] babe.
I've been working all day.
I'm tired.
And she goes, you don't work.
You just make jewelry.
[LAUGH]
But I mean, sometimes
I feel like that.
I said, yeah.
I just make jewelry.
I play all day.
[DRILLING]
The seasons influence
the way I work, for sure.
A lot of it has to do
with the rhythms of just
busyness, tourist traffic.
You know, fall and
winter are more
contemplative than
the summer, so there
are opportunities to sort
of relax and try new things.
But really, what
you're focused on
is production, because
you're gearing up
for a very busy season.
Summer is very bustling,
busy, so you tend
to do more repetitive tasks.
There's not a lot of time
to explore new things.
And that wonderful period after
Christmas when your last craft
show is done and you've had
a chance to reboot, you know,
those next several
months tend to be
the time where you
work on new things
and try to develop new skills.
[DRILLING]
>> The Gabriola Thanksgiving
Studio Tour is a self-guided
tour of artists studios where
people can pick up a brochure,
look at a map of the island
that shows where artists
and artisans are doing their
work and displaying and selling
their work.
Get in the car and drive
around and visit those artists.
Talk to those artists,
look at their tools.
Many of them are actually
demonstrating their work,
so you can stay and watch
them create a piece.
>> All right.
So we're done with it on here.
We're going to take
it off the plate
and put it onto a punting.
>> And then you can get in the
car and move on to the next.
And so you can see--
in a weekend, you can see
jewelers, potters, and carvers,
and painters, and
glass blowers, all
talking about
making their works.
[BIRD CHIRPING]
>> I don't really feel like--
yeah.
I don't really feel like I don't
live on Gab, because I'm here
all the time.
I moved here because it
was quiet and beautiful and
inexpensive.
And I had been living on the
road and living in big cities,
and living in the
world of musician,
of being a touring musician.
And to me, the fact that
it was quiet and beautiful
and natural and undeveloped
and inexpensive to live
was why I moved here.
Well, I built this
shop to do what I do.
And it's my home, Gabriola.
This is where I fit in somehow.
But I don't know--
you know, the question
comes up about living in--
do you live where
you're awake, or do you
live where you're asleep?
You know?
I spend my conscious time
on Gabriola, doing this.
That's what I do.
I don't know.
This is just-- seems
to belong here.
Yeah.
I'm not all that crazy
about talking about myself,
but you know, what
we are talking about,
like the things about the slow
movement and respecting craft
and things like
that, I'm actually
really passionate about that.
This commission is actually
really, really special to me
for a number of reasons.
The man who commissioned
it, he heard
another one of this
model, but he's never
seen one, because he's blind.
So for me, this is
very special for me,
because his interest in it is
a lot of what my interest is,
is how it sounds and how
it feels and how it smells.
And you know, it's tactile.
It's balance.
And one of the
things that is very--
even more kind of
poignant for me
is that it's kind of a miracle
of modern art ophthalmology
that I actually can see at
all, which is really amazing.
[GUITAR]
Yeah.
So this instrument is
designed and made on Gabriola.
It's a Gabriola [INAUDIBLE].
And it's got red cedar,
ancient red cedar belly
and what we call yellow
cedar back and ribs, all
from very ancient wood, and
all salvaged from the beach.
And then the neck is made of
true cedar, which they call
Cuban cedar or Honduran cedar.
[GUITAR]
So three cedar.
So one of the things that being
an artisan, it teaches you,
is respect.
And it teaches you respect
for the people that
came before you in your craft.
You had a question
about artisans.
What is the value of an artisan?
I mean, part of it, it's the
distillation of knowledge
and technique and awareness.
And I mean, I think it's a value
to society to have people that
preserve traditional culture.
There's a few
reasons why what I do
is really impractical,
because it's slow
and it's really holistic.
But there are a few
reasons why it's actually
kind of valuable, in that
because I'm not industrial,
I can use a lot of the material
that the industry overlooks.
I can actually make
an entire guitar out
of the dumpster of
a guitar factory.
The holistic technology--
and I approach it-- this
is kind of my approach.
I start with materials
that I salvage,
and then I bring that to a point
where it's a finished product.
I know where the
materials come from,
how they were sourced,
what they are.
And then, you know, you do the
process all the way through.
And I do it in a very
slow, low footprint.
Very low destructive element.
You know what I mean.
I don't have--
I do primarily by hand.
I don't use toxic
chemicals in my finishes.
[GUITAR]
Yeah.
So I mean, it's a little
hard to change gears
from planes to guitars, but
that's what that's about.
[RAINFALL]
>> I don't make
things with my hands.
I make things with words.
[LAUGH]
I think there's a real need,
a desire for authenticity
and for the non-reproducible.
And I think that
as people, as we
start to fear that maybe
our own subjectivity,
our own way of being is becoming
more and more like these mass
produced, easily reproduced
objects, that we're becoming,
like, easily reproduced people.
And one of the ways we might
try to resist that or correct
that relation is to
surround ourselves
with handmade objects.
[DRILLING]
There's a return
to a kind of desire
or a wish to encounter
handmade objects.
And I think that
that's definitely
a response to
oversaturation with mass
produced, cheap commodities.
There's definitely something
about an intentionality, right?
For me, and I think for
a lot of other people
that I've talked to, it's
actually a kind of exodus.
It's a desertion, I think, from
the city, from the metropolis.
One of the things that drew me
here had to do with a kind of--
I guess a spirit of autonomy
and self-sufficiency
and a kind of a slowness.
Raymond Williams
has this great line
about the need for
breathing space, places
that are sort of outside
of the systems of control.
And I mean, we're never really
outside of those systems.
But for me, Gabriola
and the islands
have always been a place
where people have assembled
themselves so that they could
live slowly and in a more
autonomous, intentional way.
Slowness allows for
a more aesthetic,
erotic apprehension of
the world, a kind of grip
on the world.
>> All right.
So we're working on a pumpkin.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For me, it was a
combination of a lot of hours
in the darkroom and watching
a special on glass blowing
on CBC.
I always felt in the darkroom,
I was painting with light.
And you know, when you're
dodging and burning
and carrying on
like that, and then
I watched this glass
blower working,
and it was like he was
sculpting with light.
And I shared that
joy with Marianne,
and then she turned around
and got my first fix.
[LAUGH]
>> Blow, please.
Then after a while, I realized
he wasn't going to stop,
so if I wanted to spend
any time with him,
I'd better learn how also.
>> We do not sign our
glass with our names.
We sign our glass
[? the Dance ?] Glass,
because every piece we
make in our own minds
anyway is a collaborative
undertaking.
Doing this together is really a
large part of the magic for us.
>> The piece, that's one of
the things that really said
it's time for me to
leave Calgary now.
It's just the pace of the
city picked up and up.
We're not trying to
get somewhere else.
We're here, and we're able
to let our sense of being
here emerge through what we do.
Now lots of us do things
with the ocean and the idea
of the place that
we're actually in,
and sometimes we play
with those images too.
But it's perhaps more than just
the representation of place.
It's more of emergence from
the experience of being here.
>> I suppose we can say
there's more greens and blues
in our work because
of being here.
[LAUGH]
What we see ourselves creating
is perhaps not as geometrical
as it might be if
we were in the city.
I think that urban living
creates particular mental sort
of metaphors and that
one tends to riff on
without even knowing it.
And I think the rural
landscape, the natural landscape
does the same thing.
>> I think we're
influenced-- you're right--
in unconscious ways about
what we are surrounded
by, the shapes and the lines.
>> Cityscapes tend to be a
lot more angular, up and down,
vertical lines,
squares, rectangles.
The landscape that
we live in tends
to be more rounded and
softer, less metallic colors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know, as soon as the
weather gets a bit nicer,
my thoughts turn to starting
the pottery here again.
I was a construction engineer,
surveyor in Australia,
in heavy construction.
And the last job I'd worked
on there was in Sydney,
was an expressway right
through the middle of town.
And I just wanted to
see a bit of the world
before I settled down
[INAUDIBLE],, et cetera,
and got a job in Toronto on
the [? Spadina ?] Expressway.
And it's like I
could've walked off
the end of the job
in Sydney onto this--
it was exactly the same.
Six lanes right
through a subdivision,
through an old suburb.
And the job sent me
out to Vancouver.
It was this time of
year, about March.
You know, it was just all gray
snow and freezing in Toronto.
And out here, it
was cherry blossoms
and pretty girls and
springs had sprung.
I just said, this is for me,
and I've been in BC ever since.
Back in the day when
I first came here,
there was only one potter.
And it wasn't like there
was lots of painters
or weavers or anything.
There wasn't much
of anything, really.
It wasn't the Isle of
the Arts 40 years ago.
It was the isle of
cheap land and hippies
gone to bush and resentful
old farmers, really.
And you know, I'm saying that
even 30 years ago, I mean,
I was a working machine
really then when I was young.
And still, you
know, there wasn't
a living that was going to
pay for my kid's dental costs.
There just wasn't that
kind of living in it.
If you were happy living
in the bush, being poor,
you know, it would
support that, but it
was why I took other work.
I tell you what.
There isn't a
single pottery store
in the lower mainland or
Victoria operating now
that was operating
when I started potting.
As retail rents rose in the
Vancouver Victoria area,
you just can't get enough
dollars per square foot
on the shelves with pots.
You know, this is bulky,
heavy, and not very expensive.
I've experienced people coming
here, wanting to buy things.
But you know, well, just ship
it to me in San Francisco.
And many times, the
cost of the shipping
was more than the value
of the stuff inside.
I just finally said,
look, if you want my work,
you've got to walk up my road.
You know?
I sometimes think, oh, I wish
it was at a busy crossroads.
But on the other
hand, I don't really.
I like to live here like this.
>> We should get
the weed whacker.
>> Every year, I do
things with the school.
>> OK.
Let's go.
>> Couldn't we
get a wheelbarrow?
>> Oh, yeah.
We need a wheelbarrow.
>> Go get a wheelbarrow.
>> Hundreds of kids have been
through here over the last 35
years.
It's been the
tradition at the school
that the graduating class paints
about a 10-foot square section
of a concrete wall around
the back of the school.
>> What are you guys
trying to do anyways.
>> [INAUDIBLE]
>> Immediately, the idea
coalesced into, like,
an entry portal that had welcome
in English and [INAUDIBLE]----
what's that?
[INAUDIBLE] beside it.
And then just a
clay button blanket.
The whole thing's made up
of these four-inch tiles
that we were making
the other day.
And each kid's making
it individually,
yet the whole thing's being
pulled together by the fact
that I'm just using
these two colors.
It makes sort of a
patchwork quilt out of it.
And across the board
are my dedication
to the students of
tomorrow from the students
of today sort of thing.
I love their
unfettered imagination.
It's like you look at
a little kids drawing.
They don't think about
whether, oh, I can't draw.
They just draw.
And at some point in
their development,
we become inhibited,
and then we can't draw.
Somebody who could
draw, now we can't.
And you know, I just like
to be part of getting in
before that cliff.
And you know, yes, you can.
And here's how you can.
And just the enthusiasm
of kids and their knowing
no boundaries, really.
I really, really enjoy
classes with kids.
I mean, I love the fact that a
couple of hours of pandemonium,
you know, in the end
coalesce into this table
full of quite lovely things.
And that's really fun.
>> The islands collect people
who are all interesting
in their own way.
And it's part of
the reason that we
love running the newspaper
on the Gulf Islands,
is because there's
always a story to tell.
Somebody's always doing
something really interesting
here.
It's important to look
at the buy-in local,
because you sometimes
take a little extra time
in talking to the
person who made it,
and find out whether
this is something
that's appropriate for what
you want to use it for.
And there's also that sense of--
you know, there's
the sense of pride
that it came from
your home community
rather than from
wherever in the world
it might have been made instead.
That's one of the
biggest things people
can do to make an impact
on their community
is ask that question,
can I get it locally?
I think the creativity runs
through almost anybody that
has to live on the Gulf Islands,
or chooses to live here,
because by being an
island, it forces
you to get creative in how
you do different things.
We talk about incubators in
the sense of the tech world.
For Gabriola, what
we have here is
an incubator for the creative
side, where people can
get creative about anything.
With the Isle of the Arts
Festival, they come out
and they share their techniques
and such in workshops
over the course of nine or
10 days here on Gabriola.
And locals attend those.
Visitors attend those.
The workshop hosts
themselves will often
go to other workshops and
learn new ways of doing things.
And they're showing each
other how to better do things,
how to better make things,
how to better create.
>> I try to incorporate
locally gathered materials,
just because it seems
the right thing to do.
It's more organic.
People identify with it more.
They can say, my gosh, that's
just like the blackberries
I tripped on yesterday when
I was walking on that trail.
In fact, in a lot of
cases, it's nuisance stuff.
I use ivy.
Ivy is lovely to work
with, but a lot of people
really curse it, especially
when it gets in their garden
where they don't want it.
And the blackberries
are the same.
I started making
baskets in 2002.
There was a group
of us on the island
that started by doing a
project to raise money
for the food bank.
It was about 10 of
us that were hooked.
And we kept going.
We meet every week.
We have done since then.
Meet every week in
different people's homes
and just make baskets together.
I have always loved baskets.
Right from when I was
younger, I collected them.
I bought them when I traveled.
And I always wanted to
know how to make them.
And when this opportunity came
up, it was perfect for me.
I use daffodil leaves a lot.
Make them into a cordage.
This is what you end
up with, is the cordage
that's got that lovely
golden tinge to it.
And then here, we have cedar
root and-- sorry, cedar bark.
These are pine needles that
I've gathered right here
on my street.
This is something I haven't
mentioned, deer horn.
I can drill into this
and use it for the handle
of a basket like that.
This is cedar root, which
is beautiful to work with.
When it's wet,
it's very pliable.
You have an idea, and you do it.
And if it works, it works.
If it doesn't, you do
something else with it.
[LAUGH]
It's very much a
forgiving art form,
because you can shape almost
anything when it's wet.
And it dictates
its own shape too.
A lot of baskets have
a mind of their own.
And even though you're
wanting to make it this shape,
it might end up quite
different, and sometimes more
pleasant than what
you had in mind.
Often, I'm reminded of back
in the days when we first
bought our place here.
And there was a saying
that rubber gumboots
were what we all
called Gabriola dancing
shoes, because that was about as
dressed up as people got here.
So that's an aspect of this
place that we've always loved,
is that there is no pretense.
>> So how is it reflected
in your craft, in your work?
>> Well, a lot of the materials
I use are very humble.
And at the time I
started using them,
I thought, who's going to pay
money for something that you've
just gathered for nothing
out of your garden
or out of the forest?
Certainly not going to do that.
What's the point of
bothering to do that?
However, it has turned out
to be just the opposite.
People are much more
enthralled with the things
that I've made from natural,
locally gathered materials
than they are with the very
symmetrical, perfect basket
like what you can buy
in Michael's or Pier 1.
[WAVES CRASHING]
>> Saturday is the busiest day.
Well, say on a Saturday
farmer's market,
I'd sell 10 times the bread
that I would sell, say,
in a Saturday in February.
On the Saturday
market in the summer,
we'll make 11 different
kinds, I guess.
I think there's
about 11 varieties.
10, 11 varieties of scones.
And then at least 10
varieties of bread.
I pre-shape the loaves.
I shape the loaves.
I put them into the oven, and
I take them out of the oven,
and I put them in bags.
So it's touched
all the way along.
So that's a big difference,
I think, between what I do
and what a big commercial
bakery would do.
I can see how the dough's
reacting through every step
of the process.
At its worst,
commercial bread is more
like a meringue
or a marshmallow,
because it's got so many
different elements in the dough
to make it do what
time takes to do.
And so they use
conditioners and additives
to replicate this time,
because they're in a hurry.
Food for the most part is dead.
[LAUGH]
You know, and I've spent 25
years putting Xs on protein.
You know, grill marks.
You know, I thought
that cooking was diverse
and that baking
would be monotonous,
but it's the complete
opposite for me.
I find even though you're doing
the same basic thing with bread
every day, there's such a
diversity and a uniqueness.
It's alive.
That's the biggest thing.
It's mentioned in a few
different books, the slow rise
method.
And so I liked that name,
because most good things
happen slowly.
I wouldn't be doing this without
support from the community,
from the designer
of the building
itself who did it at no cost.
The only request
was to donate bread
to the food bank,
which I continue to do.
To residents who
lent me money to put
on a down payment for the house,
because I was self-employed
and no bank would lend
me money, to the man that
lives next door that
cleared the lot and supplied
the gravel, the sand,
who never gave me a bill.
So it's an incredible island
from that perspective.
And baking bread is a--
in hindsight, is a
very fundamental way
to give back to the community.
You know?
I've never had a
job or done anything
where people thank you on a
weekly basis, if not more,
for doing what I do.
We were talking about the
industrialization of things,
and that certainly, I
think, was the downfall
of a lot of things.
And bread as a utilitarian
or as a utility that
is square and fits a toaster and
toasts quickly and efficiently
is become the norm for so many
people that outside that box,
it's foreign.
Like, the idea of having to cut
bread as opposed to having it
pre-sliced.
It takes away a
certain connection
with the product that you have.
I can't imagine
many people taking
a loaf of store-bought,
pre-sliced, square bread
and smelling it.
Whereas if you take the loaf of
bread that's been handmade out
of the bag and you've got to cut
it, you first have to touch it.
And you probably
look at the loaf.
You know, there's
a deeper connection
that you have with the product.
You know, I often use the term
that I earn a lifestyle, not
a living.
You're not going to get
very wealthy doing this,
so you earn the ability to
have a wonderful lifestyle
here on the island.
>> We have a Saturday morning
market from June through till
October.
Everything that is sold
here, all the vendors
are citizens of Gabriola
or [? Mag ?] Islands.
So everything has to be
made or produced here.
>> Made on Gabriola, it's
a very West Coast feel.
There are apparently
more artists and artisans
working and making
a living on Gabriola
than anywhere else in Canada.
>> Good morning.
[LAUGH]
>> Gabriola just encourages or
attracts very creative people.
If you have a
group of something,
of people doing their
best kind of work,
it attracts other people to come
and do their best kind of work.
So you get that--
we feed off each other.
We get encouragement
from each other.
People buy our goods.
One of the things
that I've noticed
since I've been doing
this is I still sell
more every week to
the locals than I
do to the tourists, which
constantly astonishes me.
You know, the market
fulfills a big place socially
on the island.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Now the beauty of this is it
gives me a lot of force to put
these in place
here, these screws.
And the reason I'm using this
over, say, a cordless drill
is because I want to hear.
I want to feel the tension
that I'm applying to that screw
so that I'm not
breaking anything.
But I also want to hear
if I'm cracking anything
or if anything's making an
unusual noise that does not--
it doesn't sound good, and I'm
going to have to repair later.
It's such an old-school
tool that is so functional
and still has its
place that people
don't appreciate anymore.
It's a little sail rowboat
that somebody brought to me.
His son built this boat down at
the Port Townsend boat building
school.
And his son unfortunately
had passed away way
before his time.
And so the man who
brought this to me
has asked me to restore it
for him in memory of his son.
I was painting and doing
artwork at the same time,
and I was on the fence.
I really wanted to do that
more than the boat building.
But then I got into doing--
I started getting into more
of the wood side of it,
and I really saw the
creative components to it.
You know, it's like a
three-dimensional sculpture,
a functional piece of sculpture.
And I started seeing
that side of it.
And that really changed
my point of view about it,
and it wasn't just
a job anymore.
I started seeing it
as a romantic world,
and really appreciating it.
Wooden boats, if
you maintain them,
they'll stay true and
strong for a long time.
But if you let them
drop for a year or two,
they fall very
quickly, and then they
fall into disrepair very fast.
And then to hire somebody to
fix it is quite expensive,
so that's where I
come in, is I can
teach those guys how to do it.
I've started running some
classes through my school now.
So they're woodworking classes
with a marine slant to them.
So some of them are basic
introduction to woodworking,
and then I'll teach other
things like block making, block
and pulleys.
But I'm also doing other stuff
that's fun for me as well,
and that's like driftwood
furniture making.
So we can go to
the local beaches,
and we can collect
driftwood off the beach.
And it's just this--
you know, we call it the
beach depot where we can just
go pull this beautiful material
up and build simple furniture.
I have a friend on the island
here who mills up wood.
And so I go buy a lot
of my wood from him,
and he's providing me
wood that's from Gabriola.
And then I turn around and
make things out of that.
But where would I find that
anywhere else, you know?
And be able to have the luxury
of going there and picking that
out instead of having the next
guy behind me trying to outbid
me or, you know,
trying to buy it all
because he just wants to
hoard it away somewhere.
So things are a
little slower, and I
appreciate that very much.
I think the creative
process eases.
There's a lot of
overlapping where
you can take a lot of
those skills, knowledge.
I mean, for instance, for me
to be able to paint a boat,
because I've worked
on boats for so long,
I can actually see and make
sure that it looks correct.
Because if the lines
are off, the shape
is slightly distorted
for whatever reason,
it can be quite irritating
to a lot of people,
especially if they know how
boats are supposed to look.
>> When something
is made by hand,
it connects the maker with
the material, for one,
whether it's clay
or wood or silver.
There's an actual
physical connection
between the maker
and the material.
It also implies a uniqueness.
The item that's made,
it's not mass produced.
It's a one-off.
Even if it's made in a
mold or to a pattern,
each handmade item is
going to be unique.
It's going to have the
actual mark of the maker
on it, because their
hands have touched it.
The value of artisan
work in a community,
particularly in a
small community,
it connects people
to each other.
When I go see a
potter or a jeweler
and I take a bowl or a
cup from that potter,
then I have a
connection with them.
Not only a financial
transaction, but I
have something.
I have a bowl or
a cup that I use
every day that I have my
coffee out of in the morning.
And so I'm always
mindful of that creator.
And then in this
community, I also
know that my neighbors
and friends and people
around the island are also using
a [? Gramshian ?] bowl or cup,
or wearing jewelry made by Nina
Turczyn or by Laura Hanford.
So we're all
connected by the way
we have and use and display
these handmade items
on the island.
And so we're connected
to the artist.
We're connected to each other.
We're connected to this
place through the material.
>> When you're doing
stuff like this,
you're working with your hands,
you're using material that has
been in--
has evolved with humankind
throughout the history
of our existence on this planet.
So to have a
disconnect from this
and not appreciate it
or not learn it I think
is really unfortunate.
I think kids need to
be playing with wood,
and they need to be playing
with other materials that
brings them back to who we are.
>> They see that we value this
work, and we value the artists.
We value the process.
And that's creating the
next generation of artists
and makers, or the
next generation
of people who will appreciate
and value art and artists.
[MUSIC PLAYING]